So, welcome to the online webinar. I hope you can all hear me. We will wait one or two more minutes for the rest to join. I would be super interested to know uh where are you coming from. So from which city and country you're joining. So that would be super cool if you could let me know in the chat. I can see Madrid, Spain. Nice. Oh, Brazil. Good morning. So, Paulo, Copenhagen. Okay, nice from Swiss. Good afternoon. Okay, that's great. So then let's get started um with today's webinar testing spring boot applications demystified a hero's journey through the spring boot testing labyrinth. I want to make this presentation or the webinar the session a bit more interactive. So I've prepared a mentee for those that don't know it. It's a small uh web tool where you can anonymously submit um answers to questions and polls. I will share the link uh with you in the chat so you can visit the page and throughout the talk uh at various slides um I will ask you to to answer some questions to to better understand at at which at which point in your spring boot testing journey you are. And I would like to start with the first two questions. So when you open the link uh you can already answer the first two questions. First question is um despite having LLMs and code agents, do you still write your tests by hand? Um so I'm wondering uh who of you uh is still doing manual work or or still takes the craft to to write the tests by hand. And the second question is um do you enjoy writing uh your automated tests? So within this um mentee you will find further questions. You can already go ahead and and answer the questions uh right now or or later and during the talk and one of the last questions in this menty is also a general FAQ. So whenever you have questions please feel free to add them there. Um so we have a central place for all the questions. One of one or two questions in the chat might get lost. So menty would be uh the best place to submit them. And in parallel I can already see the answers live uh what you're entering. So uh we can see here I would say 99% almost of of of you in the audience still write the tests by hand. That's uh quite nice to see. Do you enjoy writing automated tests? Also, um yeah, 12 against four. That's also great to see that um you enjoy writing your automated tests. So, thanks for already answering them. Please feel free to go ahead in the menty. I will again post a link for those that joined a bit late. Um let's get started with the webinar. So as a first step I want to frame this entire webinar with the um yeah labyrinth analogy. So uh where do we start at the beginning of the maze uh the great entrance um we may be new spring boot developers we may be already experienced Java developers coming to Spring Boot but automated testing with Spring Boot uh really comes with challenges. So, especially if you're new to Spring Boot in general, one of these challenges or one of the things uh that um we as developers uh attend to is we might copy test configuration from St overflow back then. Now it's AI without really knowing what the test configuration does and then wondering if the test doesn't work um what's going on. There's a paradox of choices for uh Spring Boot test annotations. So there are many annotations and and getting used to them, understanding their use cases, their configuration and Spring Boot auto configuration in general can become quite difficult. So that's also a big challenge uh when starting uh with automated testing in Spring Boot. Depending on how we write our tests, refactoring um may not be easy. So there might might be a fear of uh refactoring because our tests don't break for the right for the wrong or right reasons. So if we for example use mojito too much and our test becomes almost an copy of our implementation, there's not much room for for actual refactoring with our safety net uh because uh each change to the implementation will result in a failing test. So that's also a big challenge. And in general, if we only write our tests to to satisfy coverage metrics to make our product owners happy in the sprint review to look at the coverage metrics KPI, uh that's also at least for me the wrong reason because this doesn't increase in general our productivity that we want uh with a great test suite and in general just optimizing for the KPI of test coverage uh is not helping us uh gain confidence in or in our application when doing changes or refactoring code. Some or one or two years ago, I defined my northstar for automated testing. So when I get asked um why should we write tests? Why do we do automated testing? The answer for me at least is not because of coverage metrics. Um the answer is the following example. So imagine you're working on a spring boot project and you see a pull request um popping up uh on on a Friday afternoon. So spring boot 4 is now there for some weeks and renovate or dependabot um raised a pull request to update your project to spring boot 4. You see a green tick. So in this example, GitHub is connected to your CI pipeline either GitHub actions or or Jenkins. All your tests are green. Now the question is how confident are you to to click um yeah merge uh on a Friday afternoon and automatically deploy to production um and have still have a peaceful weekend. So that's a quite hard north northstar for for for many teams. But for me at least when doing consultant consultant work or when when working on my own project that's at least the northstar I try to aim for. So everything that that play that plays or that pays on on this goal is time invested well. So it's not only automated testing, it's automation in general. It's having a solid um monitoring setup. It's being able to roll back fast be having database backups ready to be to be applied. So yeah, even if um errors occur during a deployment or a change was made that that introduced a regression, how fast are we to to uh yeah fix this? So that's kind of the northstar I try to aim for when we're doing automated testing because with automated testing our test suite really gives us um fast feedback and um gives us confident uh deployments. Um so overall that's that's where I I try to aim for. For some teams, this picture doesn't help because they have um they don't do continuous live deployments. But if you're doing it, that's kind of uh yeah, not um a subjective feeling uh how how close you are to to achieve this. So how to get there? Um we have to to pass various um parts of the Spring Boot uh testing uh labyrinth. So sticking to the analogy of of the maze um throughout this webinar, we will um see how to fight various um boss uh chambers here. So we will start with unit testing. That's our agenda. We will continue with slice testing and then the last the final boss will be integration testing. We will see how to how to tackle these parts throughout the way. We will collect uh three quest items. First is the caching amulet that will help us um yeah run our test suite faster. Then the lightning shield and last but not least the scroll of truth. Until then we are final uh through the maze and can can can leave the labyrinth and have a better overview how testing spring boot applications can work in general. For sure within the next um 50 minutes we will we can't go into that much detail for all the parts. should rather be a first uh idea for you uh to give you the the most important information for the various testing technologies, some recipes on on how to how to yeah write fast Spring Boot test suites. Overall the goals um I want to provide you a clear mental map so that you understand where unit testing, slice test and integration testing make sense for your spring boot applications and which tools to use, which annotations roughly to use and uh the challenges for for each uh testing layer. I want to show you some practical techniques uh to speed up your test suites. So it's not about uh compounding thousands of tests. We also have to ensure they run fast because the slower our test suite is the slower our feedback cycles and we want fast feedback cycles. So developers should not skip testing locally because it takes too long. We want uh our test suite to be executed quite fast so we can validate a new feature or check if we uh introduced a regression. Quick words about me. So I'm Philip. I'm a self-employed developer from a small town uh in in Germany in the state of Bavaria. I've been blogging for almost six to seven years in the in the Java realm. Um and really within the last four to five years, I narrowed down on the niche of automated testing for Spring Boot applications. So I'm creating content on a regular basis, writing blog post, uh YouTube videos in the past, some books, some online courses, all uh targeted um for the Java and Spring Bootstack. I'm founder of a company um our goal is our mission to enable developers to frequently deliver software with more confidence and testing and automated testing done right is a big part of this. And like most of us uh in the call here, I I do enjoy writing tests. So it it makes fun. But it only started to make fun really when I really understood um how to do it and really understood the Java testing toolbox, what to test where. Just uh cargo culting, copy pasting uh was was not that fun at all. So the first quest we have, the first boss we have to fight is unit testing. Unit testing um brings us to our foundation. Um so with every spring boot project um we get what I refer to as the testing Swiss Army knife. So every spring boot project right from day one has this dependency in their pom or built gradal. You can't even deselect uh this dependency when you um start a new spring boot project. It's the Spring Boot starter test. It lays it lays there in your project. You might not recognize it, but if you take a closer look, um this dependency alone brings all you need brings us all we need for for at least basic unit and later also integration testing because it transitively pulls a lot of testing dependencies. And the cool thing is that like with everything that Spring Boot manages for a dependency, Spring Boot will make sure the versions are compatible with each other. With each Spring Boot bump, the versions of these transitive dependencies get bumped and we really can start um from day one with our testing efforts. We don't have to discuss in our department or with any architects which test framework to use. we can still opt out and say we don't want to go for JUnit but in general when when starting this is a nice feature when we take a closer look at the transitive dependencies so to understand what really gets pulled you can see here the the log output of Maven dependency tree um there's a similar command for for gradal uh this will show you all the transitive dependencies that the spring boot starter test puts into your project um so we can see a lot of dependencies. I marked them here with with yellow. All of these are part of the project. As we scope the dependency with test, there's also no issue or you might wonder I don't need those. I don't I want to exclude them because they would otherwise increase the file of my jars jar. But the good news is that they are test scoped so they don't end up in your production jar. So spring boot won't bundle it. So they are there only for testing. So there is no issue if spring boot pulls more than you actually need because you will see um these are the dependencies and some of them can be interchanged with each other. So the first dependency that gets pulled is our testing foundation. It's JUnit with Spring Boot 4. We already get JUnit 6. All other versions have JUnit 5 included into the project um for testing. So JUnit I hope is familiar with most of you. It's a testing framework that that yeah is really the engine that allows us to to run and create our tests. Mojito is included in this testing Swiss army knife. Mojito allows us to create mock objects. We get assert J. So while JUnit has some basic assertions like assert equals, assert not, assert null for example, assert true with ethert J we have a little bit more fluent and chainable assertions. The assert that that we can use instead of JUnit. We also get Hamrest yet another flexible assertion matcher library um that is also part of various spring test uh API methods where we can pass a hemrest matcher. We get JSON assert pull to our project that lets us compare entire JSON strings with each other. We have JSON path that's not a test library rather than a yeah similar like X path for XML. we can have a um pathing querying language to extract data from JSON. So that's quite helpful when we test um for example a rest API and we want to to we are only interested in a nested JSON field or the length of a nested array then we can use XPath XML unit for those that work with XML we have a unit testing library here and also a veility that's a rather new dependency that got put as a transitive dependency to this testing Swiss army knife this really conven convenient library when you handle asynchronous code. So for example, you write the test for a message listener that reads something from a queue and then performs an operation and then store something in a database. If you would use just assert that um your test might fail because um the operation is async. So when you put the message in the queue during your test and then let the application perform the operation then and immediately after try to assert something on a database it might not have had happened yet. So there you need tools you can use thread.leep you can write your own as async handling library but there's a utility which you should definitely take a look at. This is quite convenient and you have a fluent language to express your async uh assertion for such cases. Unit testing in general. So in short uh unit testing spring boot applications like I define unit testing is similar to unit testing Java application from any other framework. So with unit testing uh you try to verify the behavior of an individual component class or method in isolation from from its from their dependencies. So usually you either provide a stopped implementation of a dependency with a dependency I mean collaborator of a a class. So your user controller for example requires a user service to work and you would mock or provide a fake implementation because you want to test your unit user control in isolation. The confidence we gain is um quite high when we have some logarithmic verifications, a lot of business logic, small units, uh computations where we can really narrow down and write a unit test for. There are some pitfalls. So unit testing can become quite hard if we um have to test an untested class that is quite large, a got class um with many dependencies, huge um methods that do many things and not just one thing. Then unit testing can become quite complicated. So here as a hint test-driven development can help because from day one then you have the testing requirement on top of your head and then we'll see on a continuous basis that with all the changes you're doing to your implementation unit testing becomes more and more complicated. So there are pitfalls. Um the tools we use in general JUnit or any other test framework mojito and an assertion library that's roughly uh unit testing with spring boot in 2 minutes. So there's also more we could go into but for us now a high level overview is is what we want to see. There are some limitations. So with unit testing we can quite nicely test a small uh business operation, a small logarithmic uh thing, a discount calculation, anything that is um nicely testable in isolation but there are parts of our application where we where we can write unit test but the confidence we gain or the protection the safety net is a bit more limited. And the good example for this is our our web layer. So in this example, a rest controller um that is one um HTTP post endpoint to create a new customer implementation. A bit quite straightforward I would say. We inject the customer service and this post mapping takes JSON payload and then delegates the business operation to create a new customer to the service. And then after it completes it returns a 2011 following restful best practices and also includes um the location header for the client to know where they could requery our API to get to get the newly created user. So I guess similar things um you have seen in your application. Now the question is if we write a unit test with the definition or the tooling that I just showed you. So we don't rely on anything spring boot specific we just use JUnit and mojito. What we can do um we can instantiate our customer controller use mochito to mock the customer service and then have an an object for our unit test of the customer controller. We do have a public method. So we can for sure call this end point with a direct method call to the object and then pass the data to this method. do some assertions as we are returning the response entity from spring. We can verify that the status code is right and the header is present. That's valid. But there are some issues um when it comes to the confidence we could gain because when we directly invoke this public method here and directly pass the already serialized Java object for the payload, we don't have a safety net for example that checks is bean validation applied. So we do have here validated. If we directly pass something it's like brute force we are telling here that's the object and nothing to to validate. So that's something we lack. We lack the whole serialization. So the JSON gets mapped. We have some attributes. We do have a contract with our clients. Someone renames for example the the fields inside this that's a record. This test would not catch it because if we do refactoring inside our IDE also nicely refactors it here and it hides the issue. The same is true if our endpoint would return data. Here it's void. That's easy. But if our endpoint would return a payload, we could verify the Java objects, but we couldn't verify is the JSON properly serialized and have, for example, a safety net that nobody changes um the contract to our clients. So for sure, unit testing doesn't have the the the goal to to catch this. And writing just a unit test here is not sufficient. So there's something else we can do because the limits we just saw is in the request mapping. That's also one thing unit test can't catch. Is the endpoint mapping really correct? Are we extracting for example a path variable or query param correctly? Is validation happening? Serialization headers we can slightly test with. If we return a response entity, that's fine. But another big thing is spring security. So with the unit test you just saw, we're just invoking the method. There is no security checks um happening, not possible with a unit test. So maybe there's something else we can do. And the cool thing is there is something better with Spring. And this brings us to the next um quest step uh which is the slice testing hydra. If we take a look at a standard spring boot application context with different beans. So imagine this is your classic spring boot application. It has some endpoints to communicate with a front end. We do some network calls um for example to rest API and we store something in a database small micros service should be a typical application. Then we have different spring beans. So each circle in here is a singleton Java object for a spring bean. We have a we have many controllers. We have filters. We have schedule jobs. Maybe we have an entity class. So this makes up our entire application context. And during runtime, Spring will initiate all the things, do the dependency injection and yeah, start the application context. If we take a closer look at those different beans, we can group them. So here for example, I took the color blue to group everything that is related to the web layer to our controllers. Here the filter. So serlet filters, rest controller, controller advice, the security configuration, those are usually beneficial for our web layer. Yellow for example is our service layer. That's something in the middle. For example, if we do persistence uh in our application, I marked it here. green, the entity manager, the transaction manager, the entities and the repository. They are all somehow groupable in a big group called persistence. And the cool thing now is that Spring Boot provides so-called sliced Spring Boot test annotations to only bootstrap a minimal application context. So we are past unit testing. We are now getting to slice testing and with slice testing we get a minimal application context because imagine we want to test our controller the example we saw when testing the controller and the spring security settings there and serialization and method validation we don't care at all what's going on in the database layer we don't care if we are connecting to inteb to posgress we are only interested in the slice to be tested in isolation. For sure, we want an integration test later on that tests everything as a whole. But if we have like um really thorough tests for our controller, everything below the controller layer is usually not interested, but we are interested in all the objects that make up the controller. So the spring security, the filters, any object mapper, that should be all part of the context. And what spring provides is out of the box annotations to start a sliced context for the specific layers of our application. You can see here the common ones. So for the web layer either you are on the serlet stack then you use web MVC test you are doing reactive controllers then you are web flux test if you use graphql you have graphql test. So these are the common examples for the persistence layer. There are much more you can if you use Mongolize uh MongoDB Neo forj that doesn't matter for most of the persistence uh you get annotations from spring boot uh what happens technically um I want to show you now with the example of at web MVC test. So if we take a closer look um our rest controller we saw the customer controller has a dependency usually on a layer below. So here I marked uh it depends on a service of the layer slice below. When we now do uh this sliced context configuration and tell Spring please only prepare for me a minimal application context with just that relevant beans. Spring will do it but we will see in a in a second when the test runs we have to now step in and provide any dependencies below the web layer our own. So the context won't start because um when it starts the rest controller will complain hey I'm depending on a service which is not part of the context because spring only populates that relevant things. So we have to manually decide what to do. Usually we go with at mochito bean or mock bean to provide a mocked version. So this is no longer the at mock annotation which just does a mock uh mocked Java object but with at mock bean which we will see we will put a mocked version into the context to make uh the rest controller happy and uh allow the context to start and inside this minimal context you see it's a bit smaller we have all the important beans and can um now write more meaningful test and to see this in action let's jump to to the IDE so we can see here the customer controller uh like we saw on the slides and if I jump to the test I already prepared it uh let's go top to bottom we have the at web MBC test annotation this annotation comes in two modes either we pass a controller or not. If we do it like this, it will create a minimal application context for all our controllers. If we pass a controller, it will create it will just put this controller and all um other web relevant beans into the context. You might wonder how does spring know what to put in the context. Therefore, if we go to this annotation, we will see it's a meta annotation with a lot of Spring Boot specific annotations. The most important one is line 104 web MVC type exclude filter. And within within here, you will see what I refer to as a shopping list. So what spring boot does it does component scanning and it has a shopping list and scans the components and then only picks those that are part of their um shopping list. So here spring boot uh has defined spring beans or implementations of the these types are relevant for the web layer. So when I come across you, I will pick you for my minimal context and put you inside um in this example a web context. So this makes up the magic on on how does spring know what to put in where and yeah so we pass it here. We do import manually here the security configuration with a previous version of spring boot and spring security. The spring security was identified out of the box. This no longer works. So here I manually refer to my classic spring security um configuration. And in this example I I do uh require authentication or for the post endpoint uh the user has to be authenticated and needs the role user. So this we can also test this more easily. What we get apart from the minimal application context is also mock MVC. So mock MVC is a mocked serlet environment. Um there's not tomat there's also no HTTP port and no no port started locally. It's a mocked inmemory um serlet environment uh that we can use to interact with. You will see this with the test. It looks like an HTTP client but in technically it it isn't. So it's not doing HTTP over over network. It's just in memory. But this helps us to write better tests because we want to test web specific things and therefore we need somehow a web environment. What I'm doing next is I can let me unccomment this for a second and run the test. I would run this as is. We will see a failing test and that's the issue I try to visualize with the slides. The customer controller required a bean of type customer service that is not part of the minimal context. So the service layer was not on the shopping list because if the service layer would be on the shopping list, we almost end up in the entire context. So spring tells us I can't start the application context because your controller requires something that I did not uh configure. So here we used an atmo to be bin to put it inside this minimal application context. We then this context starts you will see it. Uh what's next is with this mock MVC. So this mock MVC is both an environment and client in one. So we can then perform against our context with this additional mocked serlet environment a request. It looks like HTTP post you do / post. You provide uh the endpoint you want to call. You have no nice JSON. So if someone for example forgets to put in here a first name and sends null, we could check if the validation is working. We could make sure all our rules are present and afterwards we can uh perform some validations on the returned object or in this example only on the headers. And the cool thing is this nicely integrates with spring security. So let me unccomment this small hack here. We quickly saw the spring security configuration which required a user role to be present and the user to be authenticated and if we don't come with an authenticated user we see here 401 um we weren't allowed to to um reach our endpoint. So this slice testing and the the the web part in particular also nicely integrates with spring security and there are annotations or ways to now pass an authenticated user from the outside. There is this withm mock user from spring security test that we put statically a locked in user into the spring security context and then fake an authentication from outside. We see a green test. Um there's an alternative and we want to make it more fine granular. We can also attach here to the request a user and can um for example override the username or put in here JWT because we don't have um username password authentication. So there's a lot to do, a lot to test, but now really nicely for our web layer because we can test much more than than with plain unit tests. Yeah, there are more test slices. I just told you WebMC test because it's nicest one I guess to to explain. Uh there's also JSON test, REST client test. You can test your your HTTP temp clients in isolation. um which makes um uh quite fun and is is super convenient than just unit testing your your HTTP clients. You see here a rough overview of the available test slice uh annotations from Spring Boot for nearly all persistence logic persistence tools there is one you can also write your own uh so um some tools um already provide your own. So for example, if you work with AWS and you know SQS and use SpringCloud, um they in their library implemented a sliced annotation to test your message listeners in isolation and only bootstrap the relevant things. So that's a nice place to start looking if you want to replicate this for example for for Kafka or any other proprietary solution where Spring Boot doesn't have yet a a Spring Boot test annotation. So summarizing where does it make sense um or what do we do with slice testing? We test now our application with a specific slice or layer um by loading a minimal application context. So for sure loading application context also takes time. So we have to consider um the time of our tests. The confidence we gain for various parts this is quite nice especially at the outer parts. So the web layer, the persistence layer, imagine just unit testing a native SQL query on a repository. That's impossible. So you need more than unit tests there. Or for your HTTP clients, if you want to test retry mechanism, pagionation, unit testing can bring you somewhere, but the confidence you really gain is with slice testing here. Prominent examples, web layer or database layer. the pitfalls. It requires some knowledge about what Spring Boot has on their shopping list, how the auto configuration works a bit behind the scenes, but once you understand this and fix your first Spring Boot application, context launch issues, then you are good to go. tools we use here still JUnit also some moito spring test spring boot and test containers which we haven't talked about but will in the next step which is for for now the last uh uh quest uh which is integration testing. So um like the uh missing boss we have to face I guess most of you have seen this basic test. So spring boot puts a single test inside each new spring boot project that looks like this. It uses the at spring boot test annotation with a single test that is empty context loads. So it tries to load the entire context and load the now the entire application and see if it starts. So again imagine a traditional application. We have our application but the more our application grows the more infrastructure components we are connecting to and the more complicated it gets. So when we write integration tests also this applies to slice testing for example for the database layer we have to discuss or define what we do with surrounding infrastructure with the database with the message cues network calls to remote service providers to remote teams. So this now really becomes a challenge because for integration testing we have to to solve um the p the the existence of of all the things around um because just mocking them won't also bring us that far. So apart from slice testing there are now three problems or challenges we have to solve. How do we ensure um to um have access to surrounding infrastructure? how to handle HTTP communication. Um so we may do synchronous calls, we may reach out for example to a stock API, weather API, the classic examples um to fetch in a microserbased environment um data. So what do we do for integration tests with these places of our application? And the last problem is how to keep now everything at a reasonable test duration because this sounds quite heavy. Starting the entire context launching maybe external infrastructure. This has to be yeah um done um with the test duration and our feedback our fast feedback cycles in mind. In the mentee, you should see a question if you continue if you're using test containers or if you are aware of test containers. Um, that would be quite important for me to understand if we may can save some time here. Um, if you could answer this for those that joined late, I will post again the link to menty where you can follow with the quizzes of the webinar and I will quickly check the test containers. Okay, there are like 10 participants that are aware of it, two that plan to use it and 10 that don't use test containers yet. So, let me quickly spend one minute uh on this slide. So for those that are not aware of test containers, test containers is I guess one of the gamechanging um Java testing libraries. It's now also available for other programming languages. With test containers, we can yeah seamlessly integrate um Docker containers for our integration test purposes. So we can utilize Docker containers um for example for a database, a message broker, a blob storage to be used during our integration tests. So the Docker Java API for sure would allow us to programmatically start and stop on our machine a container, but this is quite low level. What test containers did, they are now so a wrapper around the Docker Java API. They do much more but they allow us conveniently with Java objects to define uh surrounding infrastructure. So anything we can containerize with docker we can launch with test containers for integration test purposes. An example here could be posgress. So that's the way how to launch a posgress container. We simply provide the docker image and the version and we can further tweak this database name, password, maybe an init script and then we have two magic annotations um uh where we can um plug then the data source or the JDBC URL to our application. Don't want to spend that much detail here but what this will give us um this will delegate then to the Docker Java API. Please launch a docker container uh either locally or if you connect to a remote docker engine and test containers will do this for us. If you check then your docker ps you will see on a ephemereral port. So somewhere above 32,000 um you will get a port mapped inside the container of test contain of of docker of docker's posgress here and then what you would have to do simply is override your JDBC URL dynamically to tell hey database is not running in pro- AWS region I don't know US east it's now running locally and then you you swap out um the JDBC URL or for every tests run in the simplest way we will see how to do it better and can then connect to a local test container. So the cool thing is you don't need any tricks to go with Derby or H2 to to not use the database you use in production because with our integration test we want to get as close to production as we can to guess the most benefit and test containers is a really gamecher here because all it needs is a docker engine and and the configuration is really simple with bringing boot Um that's test containers in one or two minutes. I can provide more information or if you you search the internet there are quite great examples on how to integrate test containers with with Spring Boot and Spring Boot also has now since some versions really native support for test containers. So it doesn't take much to to get it to get the setup running. Next problem how to handle HTTP services. Um this is another major problem we have to solve. So during integration tests I assume most of us don't want to connect to the real remote HTTP service. So imagine you connect to to Salesforce or SAP having them instantiate a test environment that you configure from the outside to ensure that for all your test cases it behaves like you want it and sometimes maybe also don't um behave like you want to test 5xx scenarios that's super hard data cleanup setting up it's super insufficient and your integration test success then depends on the uptime of the remote test system if it's there. An alternative, a nicer approach, more deterministic is wire mock. Are there also other Spring Boot tools or Java tools that do the same? They allow you to locally start an HTTP server and mock HTTP responses. So, a bit like Mochito for Java objects, but here for for remote HTTP services. So what you do you simply then for integration testing purposes you tell your HTTP client to not connect to Salesforce API but to local host something and then can from the outside you have to know for sure how the responses look like but you can put them in source test resources and then can um instruct uh your your integration test to behave with a 200 for this case. For the other case, you will test a slow response a 5x. So in short, what it takes for wire mock to start it, you can also containerize it and start it in a docker container and use test containers or start it in memory. You will override. So a good pattern is for your web clients uh HTTP clients to make the base URL configurable from the outside and spring boot provides tools to override for a given context the URL and then you simply swap out and tell them please now connect to local host and then with wire mock uh it looks a bit um it's a stubbing setup you then stub if an application arrives at this end point which is for example a library application that connects to a library um API rest API in the internet. You can then simply refer to your JSON file on your class path and then uh your spring boot application for integration test purposes um will think it connected over the internet to the remote system but yeah did all the communication locally and you have everything in your hand not dependent on on on any any network uptime or or yeah access to to internet because in theory you can then also go airplane mode and run your integ integration tests without any network configuration which is also nicely a nice thing to achieve that's that's here a a a recipe or pattern you need next two one I would have to skip a bit because we are quite late in time simply summarizing integration tests um one thing we have to still discuss um the difference to to slice testing here now is um uh we now use at spring boot test. So this will start the entire application context. If we overwrite the web environment to random port or defined port, it will also start the serlet container. So Tomcat if you just use at spring boot test um there is no local port occupied then you could use mock MBC together with spring boot test. So you get the entire context but not the server container. Uh so you still use this mocked environment which is which has some benefits but the closer you get to production which is really starting Tomcat locally or jetty or whatever you're using you would need to define random port here then you run on an ephemeral port you get access by default spring boot auto configures a test client for you either the web test client the rest test template or recently the test rest client. So we now have three or four ways to um access our locally running application. That's um um is uh yeah then the strategy to access our application from the outside thinking in this micros service application setup where you have a rest API that you want to to to test against. That's in short what it takes. There are things that get now a bit more challenging because now we have to think about providing a authentication as we really start here a separate spring boot application. This does not run in the same test um thread or or context as the as the test and we can't use with mock user in the setup. So we have to provide security here from the outside. But there are also strategies to fix this. And overall what we get is now with integration testing the entire application context on a local port usually uh the confidence we can validate everything as a whole. So all our internal components are working together. You can test happy path going through the application doing network calls storing something in a database and then doing another call to check is my user created. You use at spring boot test um pitfalls starting the application for the first time may be complicated depending on how much you connect to services tools you have to provide everything. So the context starts but once you make it to that point and that's already a big win. Uh then you can then it's just writing the test security can be quite tricky but that's also solvable and then you can write your either just your happy path or you have corner cases that you want to test in complete integration of all components. That's quickly for the three test types I wanted to cover. There's for sure you could also then add all end toend testing where you do it maybe with a UI on a deployed environment. There are some more challenges and and ideas but as a broad overview these three testing types are already bring you quite far. And the last three things we want to take a look today is um yeah three quest items that we should collect along the way uh through our our maze uh that will help us um in this example now um run our tests faster. First one is the caching amulet and that's a super nice feature uh that uh many spring boot developers uh don't know and I also learned about it I don't know two years into my spring boot career it's about spring test context caching. So we have the problem that with our integration tests and a bit also with slice testing starting an application context booting it like booting an operating system takes time. So depending on how big your project is, how fast your machine is, you run the test, this can take I don't know 30 to 2 minutes in in the worst case and doing this for each integration test is a quite quite a substantial amount of time we would add to our um fast to our goal of or we reduce from our fast feedback goal. So that's something we should aim to to optimize for and spring test already has the solution in place. Um what Spring will do, Spring will cache an already started application context for us that we can reuse for another integration test. There's nothing for us to to to opt in, no dependency to include. All your Spring Boot projects already contain this. And as a as an as an example of of one of my clients project where we just optimized solely focusing on on this uh quest item spring context caching, we were able to reduce the build time from 26 minutes to to 12 minutes. Um just by making small changes you will see in a bit. There was some some tricks we had to do to make this happen, but almost or more than 50% speed improvement just by focusing on on this feature. So let's explain or let's explore how this works. Oh, it's a cache. A cache has a cache key and a cache value. So somewhere we store our cache in memory. With every cache, we want to have as much cache hits as possible. So when talking to our cache, we want to um make sure that the entity we or in this example, the context is already present. So we want as many cache hits because a cache miss results in the integration test has to start the context themselves. So imagine the following scenario. We have three integration tests that run in sequence. an order it payment IT for integration test and a checkout IT. The first order it starts empty. There's nothing in the cache cache miss. You have to start your context. That's fine. You have a specific context configuration that the integration test asks for and um there is nothing because it's empty. So it will um get it from uh it will have to start it themselves. Once the test completes um it will put the context configuration right into the cache with the cache key of this number. So every subsequent test that has the same cache key can immediately get the uh the context out of the cache. So the second test payment it you see first one take more than 3 seconds. The second one is now super fast because it doesn't have to start the application context. can just look into the cache, retrieve the context, run the tests and done. The third test here deliberately has another context configuration, a different key. Um, it has to start the context themselves, adding a bit more time to our context uh to our uh test run. And after the test completes, we see two contexts in the cache. So first question is how is this cache key calculated or where can I influence it or where does spring boot take it from to understand it let's take a look at how the cache key is built the code snippet you see here on top is um taken from spring the source code of spring test it's really just a map uh inside uh that that stores up to 32 different context texts. You can configure this. You can increase and decrease like everything was spring boot with a config value. The cache key is of type merged context configuration and the value is really just an application context that's put into the cache here. To better understand the cache key, we have to understand how this object is created to understand its hash code and to then understand when how the equality check is is made. So what Spring does when instantiating an object of this class, Spring will take a look at various parts of our context configuration. So it's like a a report that Spring will do prior to running an integration test to take a look at our integration test on on what we are requesting for the context. So for example, we might use at active profiles for the integration test. We might overwrite context configuration. We might mock different beans. So all of these things then have an impact on the context, what's inside, how it's configured. Imagine you're activating a profile for your integration test. This had a high impact on the um on the beans that are part of the context because you might have conditions where you say if this profile is active, go that route. If the other profile is active, go that route. So, Spring takes a list of characteristics for your context and creates this object and then this becomes your cache key. And if this is exactly the same, so if two integration tests have the same structural setup for their context, Spring will give you an already started application context. How to analyze this? Um, there are multiple ways. One is to take a look at the execution time. So if you run integration tests and see the first one is super slow, second one is fast, then you know, okay, maybe I assume the context could be cached here, but this is just looking at the numbers. You can also look at the locks. Whenever you see the spring boot banner, if you haven't deactivated it, um, this is an indicator for a new context start. So this is then a cache miss, not a hit. So indicating Spring had to start a new context for your test. If you want to make it more deterministic, you can also activate logging. So there's a trace log you can activate and this will give you the inside an insight to the context caching statistics. So you could what what I as as a hint what you can do tomorrow or today put this inside your lockback uh XML file run all your tests and then for the last test take a look at the lock output and see how many contexts are in your cache. How many hits you have and how many misses you have. So this gives you a first um good indicator how much context caching you are already doing. And the third way is a spring test profiler. So that's a tool I've written which is open source uh which helps developers to better understand uh the difference between integration tests. So when you're new to this topic um the most important thing is to understand how the cache key is built and to understand with two tests. Um if I'm doing this now for the test setup, I'm breaking uh um the the context configuration. So it can't be red reused and we can see so what this open source tool does um you will get the links and the slides anyway. So um I can I will share it with you. it will generate a nicel looking HTML report after your test run and then it will tell you um how good uh your your caching statistics are for your given project. And the cool thing is you can then search for example for um or a specific integration test that was run and then understand um which context was used. So they are numbered. You have for your entire test run, I don't know, 10 contexts. You know which test run on which context. And the really killer feature is then you have a visual comparison. So you can compare two contexts. So then you see here all those circles are the things spring looks at to understand is your context unique or not. And if you see a difference, for example, you can click. And now I'm comparing two contexts. That's a simple one if you know it. Context B only activates the profile test. Context A activates test and integration as a profile, making the context not the same. And this way, if this is um new to a project, it's quite nice because then you can click through and better understand here. For example, if I overwrite properties, for sure, Spring can't reuse the context because Spring has to really be sure that it can hand over an existing context and the context configuration is exactly the same. It must be the same otherwise the result is not deterministic. So therefore, this this tool can help. Try it out open source, plug it into your build life cycle um and then you get the report. There is one um final boss um in the example I showed you where we reduced the time um which I had to to optimize back then. So the project had this bad code smell I would say. So there is an annotation called at dirty's context. You might have um stumbled over this if you search for yeah solutions for integration test issues with spring boot and sec overflow. You might see answers from developers pointing you to this annotation. Hey, just use this and then my test works. And if you copy over this without really knowing what what happens behind the scenes, it's it's a bit dangerous or you you you don't do yourself a favor because at Dirty's context instruct Spring to not use the context for context caching. It's like I'm telling Spring, hey, dirty things happened during the test run. I modified global state or did other things that requires you to not consider this context for context caching and then um it's not used. So if you use this at many places then all your contexts get shut down and this particular project had at Dirty's context at a quite central place. We had an abstract integration test class and every integration test was inheriting this so and inheriting then this dirty's context annotation. So each integration test launch its own context. So you may not recognize this in a small project but over the time you see you check you check your logs it's taking now 5 minutes 10 minutes 50 minutes 20 minutes 26 and at one point in time um this was then at least for this project the issue. Um so whenever you come across this annotation be aware of the downsides. there are some um meaningful reasons to use it but if it's at the central place it will play against um the context caching. One cool new feature that coming that's coming with Spring Framework 7 which is part of Spring Boot 4 um pausing contexts that are in the cache. So there's one downside prior to Spring Boot 4. If you have many contexts in the cache, they are all active. They all have their threats. And if you have message listeners or schedule task, they are all active and eagerly waiting on a queue to to fetch data to perform operations. And if they are active and they listen to the same queue, you they steal each other the messages for example. So we also had this problem in the in the example of the speed improvement um because they were all listening to the same queue or if you have scheduled tasks that yeah do conflicting work uh that's um a bit um hard or there are solutions you could say you get one queue per context. So there are for sure ways to fix but this new feature it makes it really simple because once a context is put into a cache it's paused and paused meaning um that that beans that implement I guess it's smart life cycle interface they again that they then get the hint to pause themselves and not perform example message listener and schedule task is the simplest um example to to explain they don't perform the operations anymore more then quest item two. So we are a bit over time. Feel free to drop out. I will send you any anyway the the recording but if you still have time I'm also happy that you continue. Um quest item 2 lightning shield. So we saw context caching can do improvements but there's even more that we can do. We can do test parallelization. Um so in general we want we want to have fast feedback and reduce our build time. To make this happen, our tests unit and integration have to be written in a way that we can easily parallelize them. For unit tests, that might be much more easy to achieve in the beginning. For integration tests, you might have to do some extra work. But the basic um advice I can or I give teams is start with making sure you you get context caching. This bring a lot of speed improvement. then start to paralyze your unit test and then let's take a look at at at paralyzing integration tests and see if it really brings some some benefit or if if the first two operations are just enough. We have two ways with Spring Boot and Java to do test parallelization. We can fork a new Java virtual machine. So tell our Maven fail safe or shfire plug-in to spawn multiple JVMs and distribute the work. If you use gradal you can also configure the test task or we can use JUnit Jupiter. It also comes with test parallelization and there we are then threadbased within a JVM and can parallelize uh the the tests. So it roughly looks a bit like this. um on the left side the shorefire or fail safe or gradal parallelization telling those tools please fork multiple JVMs so it's a bit more isolated depending on the usage of test containers or any other resources uh this is a bit more isolated for sure takes more resources and on the right side this came with JUnit 5 um we can configure also um with a lot of configuration values we can decide to rep parallelize on test methods or on classes or run classes in sequence but methods in the class in parallel. So there's a lot to configure really fine grained parallelization and a lot to play around. So if you want to to speed up your test suite that's a place to to take a look at for sure. Um the devil is in the detail. Uh getting your test suite to a state where you can paralyze may take some some effort. Another one um I guess I saw it in the chat um is also um reusing containers with test containers. So if each integration test would start a new container that can take a bit of time. So I don't know the postgress container on my machine it's there in 5 to 10 seconds but the more complicated things you start a key cloak or Oracle DB um this can take more time and you want to avoid continuous restarts um and for test containers there's a nice feature with reuse that you can plug to your container configuration and then uh test containers will leave the container up and running and not clean it up and another test can can reuse it. For sure you have to ensure the data is cleaned. So if you if we talk about a blob storage, you have to ensure that the data got wiped out or your your database is in a clean state. Well, that's then up to you. When you get a fresh container, for sure you start on a green field and can can uh do whatever you want. There is this nice at test containers annotation that is super nice for for tutorials and for demos to get things started behind the scenes it activates the JUnit Jupiter extension and then we'll plug into the JUnit life cycle um some operations. So then before the test class starts test containers will start and then afterwards it will stop. So it will seamlessly integrate into the JUnit life cycle of your tests. problem is that this then also shuts down the container after after the class. So I barely use it anymore for for production projects. There are the so-called singleton container approach. It's also part of the test containers docs that uh you take you get in the driver's seat on when to start the container and to start it once and stop it once. um because otherwise um test containers might per default start too many for you. That's um a way you can optimize. There are way more things to optimize with test containers. So if you for example have um if you want a database with predefined data and by default you do it with a big flyway or liquid basease script and then some SQL scripts. Um that's that take time. uh you could also think of coming up with a predefined uh database image with a daily snapshot from your QA system to have also meaningful uh production like load data. So there are many things to to pre-initialize your containers in a way that they already have everything and your test can just run. So that's some small small hints on how to optimize here. Quest item number three, the last one, scroll of truth. Um, that's one of the recent things I I took a look at and this is mutation testing. Uh, which is a quite nice concept. Um, so in general just looking at code coverage and telling um, we have 100% or 90% code coverage. Um, this might give you false sense of security. So the metric is a vanity metric. It can says it says in general nothing. So I've seen teams optimizing for code coverage but then doing no assertions or writing not so optimal tests just to to get above a certain threshold and then product was bragging that they have 80% test coverage so we are fine and then there were errors all around the place bugs introduced. So that's not the best way and mutation testing can give you or can can put the finger in the wound um and can really tell you despite having coverage look your tests are actually not testing anything at all. So what mutation testing does we will see it in the next slide with an example it creates mutations of your code. So it will like a evil hacker change your your your source code. It will change parts of your application, run the test and see if the test detected that the code was mutated so that your unit test, integration test, whatever really also do thorough assertions and catch uh such things. For sure in production there's nobody modifying your code. But this this gives you a better hint on how good or how meaningful is my my coverage, how much we are actually covering and it can reveal blind spots and can help you write more or a better better test suite. So what and for Java the tool that is in use is called pit. Um also open source and you can easily integrate it to any Java project. As an example, imagine this method register user. Um we have some if statements here uh to check business business business uh meaningful business logic is um executed here. And what pit with as mutation testing will do it will create in this example three mutants. So it will mutate this class three times. It will change less than or equals to not equals. It will for example change dot equals this if username equals to not username equals. And here this magic number this return three it will also scrape out with another return of 42 and prepare these mutants. Pit also before doing it analyzes which tests are relevant for this method. So it wouldn't make sense to run your entire test suite now three times to to just check this. Pit is smart enough to detect which test is checking code here. And what it will do it will do three mutations and then run the relevant tests to check is this mutation killed. That's uh the the the domain language here. Um um if the test fails that's a good sign because then the mutation was detected. So here test failures are good because your test failed because the code was changed. Meaning for example in the future a newcomer developer or you are doing yourself uh not a favor and make the change and then it would introduce a regression but you have the test that that would detect it. That's good. And for the other two mutations your tests are green indicating those mutants weren't detected which is bad. So test green is bad for mutation testing because then you have to uh yeah do some work for your unit tests and um make sure to yeah thoroughly test your your parts do meaningful assertions and ensure those mutants are detected. So that's mutation testing uh something to to explore and can give you some benefit to really understand uh with the test suite we currently have how much um yeah meaningful coverage we we we do actually have. So that's it um for for this session. When it comes to the content I I would I wanted to show um in general um I would say spring boot comes with excellent test support. Uh so there are a lot of uh well thought through ideas slice testing all the testing tools the auto configuration um the profiles the context caching all the testing libraries you get out of the box with batteries included that's super nice convenient we could cover highly unit testing slice testing and integration testing um uh that's um at least the three things um that you should start with I guess most of you are already doing but maybe you get got some more hints for for the various parts and most importantly um it's test quality but it's also uh duration test execution time you saw context caching uh which can um add a lot of or reduce uh your build time for quite a a lot test parallelization and also mutation testing maybe as a new topic to explore Um what's next? So um with testing or development, software development in general, I guess everything here is team sport. Uh so it it doesn't make sense if you're the only one in your team that is advocating for automated testing. So if you are interested um to also level up your colleagues, I'm offering free meetup sessions for example in a brown bag or lunch and learn format similar like today for for companies and teams uh to to onboard or give at least some some hints like we did today. Um so if you're interested, please feel free to reach out. I'm also hosting Spring Boot testing workshops um inhouse, remote or or hybrid or in conferences as part of the menty. There's also one question if you would be interested for next year I'm planning to to run open remote workshops. So for example what we did today in more detail uh for for for 6 hours with proper examples there's a question non-binding for sure if you would be interested in such a workshop um then please yeah um answer there with yes and also consulting offerings from my side. So what I sometimes do when the teams are not sure um how how good they are or want an an outside opinion I do like like a car report for their test setup for their automation for their confidence a test maturity assessment to to take a look at their testing practices their their their testing speed give hints on on how to optimize so that's one of the many consulting offerings I I do offer currently And one more thing, so what I did um two three years ago, I combined all my Spring Boot testing knowledge into one big online course. Um this is the testing Spring Boot applications master class. uh with the goal to teach you everything you need to know to test real world microser self-contained applications um with proper example. So with testing in general, the the downside uh of some online tutorials I sometimes see or on Udemy they introduce testing quite nicely but then use example for example just a calculator and then don't talk about integration testing but in reality we all know our projects are a bit more complicated than just a calculator Java class. So with this online course, I try to mimic what I would think is a traditional micros service with the basic set of features. So this course application has a spring boot back end, a react single page application front end. We're using keycloak as an identity provider. Our back end is a resource server. So all the JWT authent uh authentication and stuff is is shown how to test it, how to do um remote calls, uh how to connect to the database and test it, what to test and message queuing with SQS here. So this could be replaced with Kafka or Rapid MQ. So that's the the application. Uh what this course is, it's like 130 course lessons and 12 hours of content. So that's quite a lot. nothing to just watch um in parallel to to coding. So really uh the idea here is to have a comprehensive uh online course and a resource with a GitHub um course application that is always up to date. And what you see here is for example one of the endto-end tests we automate at the end where we instruct Chrome to to test our application as a whole while running locally or on the CI server. So that's then the tip of the iceberg um of this online course and for you as as you're joined now the webinar um I'm you have the opportunity to join with a 50% discount. So I will uh quickly send the uh promo link that is active for the next 24 hours um to the chat. So feel free to take a look at the online course if you're interested. Um, it comes with three editions and one edition, the bundle edition. You also get access to an online course to teach you how test-driven development uh works with Spring Boot. So, we haven't touched TDD. In short, with TDD, I I I still think it's a great way to to implement applications and whenever I have the chance, I implement the applications in a test-driven development manner. The big downside is or at least for me it really made sense once I understood the toolbox. So starting with TDD while not um knowing how slice testing works, how the tools work, what tools we have, this made it a bit clunky and and not much fun. But once you really understand what's going on, um know the tools, know what to test where and when, TDD can really bring you some benefit on on your class design and and and how you approach um the application development in general. So that's part that's the offer um until tomorrow 6 p.m. Take a look. And with that, I would like to at least close the webinar for uh the content part. Um um we are a bit over time. Um the slides and recording will be shared uh once um Zoom processes the recording. I will send out an information with the slides as PDF and the recording. Um and then I yeah looking forward to to hearing from you. I saw we had some question. I unfortunately have to have to cut the webinar here. I'm sorry. I will plan more time for for questions next time. I will still um try to reach out the names that I saw um uh via email. Um please also if you have any questions reach out via LinkedIn X or email anytime. And um at last I can only wish you joyful testing and yeah have a great day.
